## Lesson 2. Creating User Interfaces

In this lesson, you’re going to learn how to build NativeScript user interfaces, including markup, styling, images, and more.

To do that, the rest of this guide will walk you through building [Groceries](https://github.com/NativeScript/sample-Groceries), a groceries management app that does the following things:

- Connects to an existing RESTful service.
- Provides user registration and login.
- Lets authenticated users add and delete groceries from a list.
- Runs cross-platform (iOS and Android).

If you follow this tutorial to the end you’ll have an app that looks like this.

> **TODO:** Add images for iOS and Android.

Let’s get started building by looking at how to add user interface components.

### Step 1. Adding UI components

The primary difference between building an app for the web and an app with NativeScript is in the UI elements that you use. NativeScript apps do not use a browser and do not have a DOM; therefore, elements like `<div>` and `<span>` simply do not work.

No worries though, as NativeScript provides an [extensive suite of UI elements](http://docs.nativescript.org/ui/ui-views), each of which are implemented with native iOS and Android controls. For instance, the [`<Label>` control](http://docs.nativescript.org/ui/ui-views#label) our previous example used is actually rendered as a [`UILabel`](https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/UIKit/Reference/UILabel_Class/) on iOS and an [`android.widget.TextView`](http://developer.android.com/reference/android/widget/TextView.html) on Android. The great thing about using NativeScript though, is that these native details are transparent to use as a developer. You type `<Label>` and let NativeScript handle the rendering details.

Let’s put this into action by adding some new UI components to start building the Groceries UI.

<hr data-action="start" />

#### Action

* **a.** Open your `app/app.component.ts` file and replace its contents with the following code.

``` TypeScript
import { Component } from "@angular/core";

@Component({
  selector: "my-app",
  template: `
    <StackLayout>
      <TextField hint="Email Address" keyboardType="email"
        autocorrect="false" autocapitalizationType="none"></TextField>
      <TextField hint="Password" secure="true"></TextField>

      <Button text="Sign in"></Button>
      <Button text="Sign up for Groceries"></Button>
    </StackLayout>
  `
})
export class AppComponent {}
```

* **b.** Save your `app/app.component.ts` file. You should see the following user interface on your device.

> **TODO**: Insert iOS and Android images

<hr data-action="end" />

There is a whole lot going on in this example, especially if you’re new to Angular. Throughout this tutorial you’ll see expandable **Background** sections that you can open for more information on the features you’re using. Here are a few things you might want to review before focusing on the UI components.

#### Background: Why TypeScript?

[TypeScript](http://www.typescriptlang.org/) is a typed superset of JavaScript that both NativeScript and Angular use. Both the NativeScript Playground and NativeScript CLI makes using TypeScript seamless, as both compile TypeScript code into JavaScript every time you make a change.

TypeScript offers many benefits to JavaScript developers, as you get powerful functionality such as code completion, as well as the ability to use newer features of JavaScript that not all web browsers support.

#### End Background

#### Background: What does the `import` keyword do?

The `import` keyword is a newer feature of JavaScript that allows you to import functions, variables, and classes from one JavaScript module into another.

In this case you’re using the `import` command to get a reference the Angular `Component` class from the `@angular/core` npm module.

Because `import` is a new feature, it doesn’t work in many web browsers. However, TypeScript

#### End Background

#### Background: What is `@Component`?

In Angular. a component manages a view, or a piece of the user interface that the user sees. A component can be used to define an individual UI element, or an entire page, and eventually you’ll add a bunch of logic to these components and use them to build an entire app.

Notice the interesting way that the `Component` class is used—with the syntax `@Component`. This is a [TypeScript decorator](https://github.com/Microsoft/TypeScript-Handbook/blob/master/pages/Decorators.md), which allows you to annotate a TypeScript class or method with additional information. For now, you can think of it as a way of adding some metadata configuration to the currently empty `AppComponent` class.

The `@Component` decorator’s `template` property tells NativeScript how to render this component on the screen. The back-tick character (\`) used with the `template` property creates a [template literal](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals), which TypeScript supports, and which allows you to write multi-line strings without using messy string concatenation.

The decorator’s `selector` property defines how a component can be used within another component’s template. For instance, a component that defines its `selector` with `selector: "foo-bar"` can be used by another component as `template: "<foo-bar></foo-bar>"`. NativeScript is smart enough to use your first Angular component automatically; therefore, the `selector` property of this first component is irrelevant.

#### End Background

This code adds two new NativeScript UI elements: a [text field](https://docs.nativescript.org/angular/code-samples/ui/text-field) and a [button](https://docs.nativescript.org/angular/code-samples/ui/button). Much like HTML elements, NativeScript UI elements provide attributes to let you configure their behavior and appearance. The code you just added uses the following attributes:

- `<TextField>`
    - `hint`: Shows placeholder text that tells the user what to type.
    - `keyboardType`: The type of keyboard to present to the user for input. `keyboardType="email"` shows a keyboard optimized for entering email addresses. NativeScript currently supports [five types of keyboards](http://docs.nativescript.org/ui/keyboard.html) for text fields.
    - `autocorrect`: A boolean attribute that determines whether the mobile operating system should autocorrect user input. In the case of email address text fields, the autocorrect behavior is undesirable.
    - `autocapitalizationType`: Determines how the operating system should autocapitalize user input. `autocapitalizationType="none"` turns autocapitalization off altogether. NativeScript supports [four autocapitalization types](http://docs.nativescript.org/api-reference/modules/_ui_enums_.autocapitalizationtype.html) on text fields.
    - `secure`: A boolean attribute that determines whether the text field’s text should be masked, which is commonly done on password fields.
- `<Button>`
    - `text`: Controls the text displayed within the button.

There are [many UI components](https://docs.nativescript.org/angular/ui/components) you can use to build NativeScript apps, and you might want to take some time to explore all that’s out there.

Let’s next focus on the other new UI component in the above example—`<StackLayout>`—and discuss how to organize your UI components in NativeScript apps.

> **TIP**:
> * The [code samples](https://docs.nativescript.org/angular/code-samples/overview.html) portion of the NativeScript documentation is a great place to find copy-and-paste friendly examples of the various NativeScript UI components. The [TextField](https://docs.nativescript.org/angular/code-samples/ui/text-field.html) and [Button](https://docs.nativescript.org/angular/code-samples/ui/button.html) code sample pages are great places to get started.
> * If you’re coming from a web or hybrid development background, you may find Nic Raboy’s guide for [Upgrading Hybrid Apps to Native with NativeScript](http://www.hybridtonative.com/) helpful, as it compares and contrasts web and native user interface implementations.

### Step 2. Organizing your UI components with layouts


### Step 3. Styling your app using CSS

### Step 4. Using the NativeScript Core theme

### Step 5. Working with images in your app


> **WARNING**: Take special care to properly close all your UI elements and _not_ use self-closing declarations like `<Button text="Sign in" />`.