## Lesson 4. Building Polished User Interfaces

In this chapter you'll learn how to use several NativeScript features that let you build professional mobile user interfaces, such as listviews, layouts, and animations.

In the process you’ll complete the Groceries app, and have a functioning list-based app that you can share with your friends. Let’s get started by looking at some things you can do to customize NativeScript UI components.

### Step 1. Customizing UI components

So far, you’ve only used NativeScript UI elements by including them in an Angular component’s `template`, but you can also programatically create and access UI elements, and each UI component has a set of properties and methods you can use to customize your app.

#### Background: NativeScript modules

All NativeScript UI components are implemented as NativeScript modules, which are a series of TypeScript modules you use to add powerful functionality to your apps. There are a [lot of these modules](https://docs.nativescript.org/angular/core-concepts/modules), and you will use several of them as you complete this tutorial.

The source code for the NativeScript modules lives on GitHub in the [NativeScript/NativeScript repo](https://github.com/nativescript/nativescript). The modules are [distributed through npm as a “tns-core-modules” package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/tns-core-modules), which all NativeScript apps depend on. Because the NativeScript modules are open source, you are welcome to [contribute changes](https://www.nativescript.org/contribute).

#### End Background

Before we start the next example, there’s one piece of background knowledge you need to know. In NativeScript, a single `<Page>` UI element wraps the `template` of every page-level Angular component. You don’t see this component, but it’s there, and it’s a UI component you can customize. Let’s look at how to do that by making a change to how the login page’s `<ActionBar>` works.

<hr data-action="start" />

#### Action

* **a.** Open your `app/login/login.component.ts` file, and add the following import to the top, which adds a reference to the `Page` class from the NativeScript core modules.

``` TypeScript
import { Page } from "tns-core-modules/ui/page";
```

* **b.** Next, alter the same file’s existing `"@angular/core"` import to include the `OnInit` interface.

``` TypeScript
import { Component, OnInit } from "@angular/core";
```

* **c.** `OnInit` is a [TypeScript class interface](http://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/interfaces.html#class-types). To see how it works, make the following change to the declaration of your `LoginComponent` class.

``` TypeScript
export class LoginComponent implements OnInit {
```

After you add the new `implements` keyword, you should see an error in Playground that says something like *“Class ‘LoginComponent’ incorrectly implements interface ‘OnInit’”*. When you implement a TypeScript class interface, you’re telling the TypeScript compiler that you must implement all methods that the interface requires. In the case of `OnInit`, Angular requires you to implement a single `ngOnInit()` method.

* **d.** To implement it, add the following method to your `LoginComponent` class.

``` TypeScript
ngOnInit() {
  this.page.actionBarHidden = true;
}
```

> **NOTE**: `ngOnInit` is one of several [component lifecycle hooks](https://angular.io/docs/ts/latest/guide/lifecycle-hooks.html) that Angular provides. As its name implies, `ngOnInit` gets invoked when Angular initializes this component.

* **e.** We’ll discuss what the code within `ngOnInit()` does momentarily, but finally, to make these changes compile and run, change the `LoginComponent`’s existing `constructor()` declaration to use the code below.

``` TypeScript
constructor(private router: Router, private userService: UserService, private page: Page) {
```

> **NOTE**: Because the `Page` class is so commonly used in NativeScript apps, NativeScript provides this syntax as a shorthand for getting access to a component’s page. You’ll see other methods of getting access to UI components to change their properties later in this guide.

* **f.** Save your files. When your app refreshes the `<ActionBar>` should now be hidden on Android.

> **TODO:** Images of Android

<hr data-action="end" />

Now that you have this code in place, let’s discuss what happens on this line:

``` TypeScript
this.page.actionBarHidden = true;
```

This code uses an instance of the [`Page` class](https://docs.nativescript.org/api-reference/classes/_ui_page_.page.html) from the [NativeScript page module](https://docs.nativescript.org/api-reference/modules/_ui_page_.html), and sets its `actionBarHidden` property to `true`, which hides the ActionBar on Android devices.

Although you can peruse the [NativeScript API documentation](http://docs.nativescript.org/api-reference/globals.html) for a full list of these properties and what they do, if you’re using a TypeScript-friendly IDE, you can get a full list of these properties at any point. You can see this behavior in NativeScript Playground.

> **TODO** Image of TypeScript autocomplete in Playground

Let’s make one last change to complete your login page, and this time we’ll use some new Angular syntax.

<hr data-action="start" />

#### Action

* **a.** Open your `app/login/login.component.html` file and change the opening `<StackLayout>` tag to use the following code.

``` XML
<StackLayout class="form" [class.dark]="!isLoggingIn">
```

* **b.** Next, open your `app/login/login.component.css` file and add the following code to the bottom.

``` CSS
.dark {
  background-color: #301217;
}
.dark TextField {
  color:  #C4AFB4;
}
```

* **c.** Save your files. When your app updates on your device, click the **Sign up** button and note how the colors update automatically.

> **TODO** Add gif images for iOS and Android.

<hr data-action="end" />

The `[class.className]` syntax is a handy Angular feature that lets you conditionally apply class names based on a boolean condition. In this case, `[class.dark]="!isLoggingIn` tells Angular to apply the `dark` class name only when the component’s `isLoggingIn` flag is `false`.

What’s even cooler is that the syntax works even if you need to apply additional CSS class names to the component. Aka, when using this syntax, `class="form" [class.dark]="!isLoggingIn"`, Angular is smart enough to keep the `form` class name applied even as it toggles the `dark` class name. You might find this trick handy as you develop your NativeScript applications using Angular.

At this point in the tutorial your login screen is now complete. You’re welcome to continue tinkering with the page if you’d like, but next we’re going to move on to build the Groceries app’s list page. And you’ll start by learning about a new set of UI components.

### Step 2. Introducing NativeScript UI

In addition to the NativeScript [core user interface components](https://docs.nativescript.org/ui/components), many of which you’ve used throughout this guide, NativeScript additionally provides a collection of rich, professional components collectively known as [NativeScript UI](https://www.nativescript.org/ui-for-nativescript).

NativeScript UI contains controls for building drawers, listviews, calendars, charts, forms, autocompletes, and more. In fact, the graph you saw back in lesson one of this tutorial was a NativeScript UI component. To show what NativeScript UI can do, let’s look at to use the suite’s listview control to start to add a grocery list to your app.

#### Background: NativeScript plugins

NativeScript UI is a NativeScript plugin. [NativeScript plugins](https://docs.nativescript.org/plugins/plugins) are npm packages with some added native functionality, such as the ability to leverage Android and iOS SDKs.

Because NativeScript plugins require full iOS and Android builds to use, normally you cannot use NativeScript plugins in the NativeScript Playground environment.

However, a few NativeScript plugins have built-in support in NativeScript Playground, including NativeScript UI, [the accelerometer plugin](https://market.nativescript.org/plugins/nativescript-accelerometer), and the [geolocation plugin](https://market.nativescript.org/plugins/nativescript-geolocation). You can [learn more about using plugins on the NativeScript documentation](https://docs.nativescript.org/plugins/plugins), and you can [peruse available plugins on the NativeScript Marketplace](https://market.nativescript.org/plugins/nativescript-geolocation).

#### End background

<hr data-action="start" />

#### Action

* **a.** Open your app’s `app/list/list.component.html` file and replace its contents with the following code:

``` XML
<GridLayout>
  <RadListView [items]="groceryList">
    <ng-template let-item="item">
      <Label [text]="item.name"></Label>
    </ng-template>
  </RadListView>
</GridLayout>
```

* **b.** Next, open your `app/app.module.ts` file, and add the following import to the top of the file.

``` TypeScript
import { NativeScriptUIListViewModule } from "nativescript-pro-ui/listview/angular";
```

* **c.** After that, in the same `app/app.module.ts` file, add the `NativeScriptUIListViewModule` class you just imported to the `@NgModule`’s `imports` array. The array should now look like this.

``` TypeScript
imports: [
  NativeScriptModule,
  NativeScriptFormsModule,
  NativeScriptHttpModule,
  NativeScriptRouterModule,
  NativeScriptRouterModule.forRoot(routes),
  NativeScriptUIListViewModule
],
```

* **d.** Finally, open your `app/list/list.component.ts` file and replace its contents with the code below:

``` TypeScript
import { Component, ElementRef, OnInit, ViewChild } from "@angular/core";

@Component({
  selector: "gr-list",
  templateUrl: "list/list.component.html",
  styleUrls: ["list/list.component.css"]
})
export class ListComponent implements OnInit {
  groceryList: Array<Object> = [];

  ngOnInit() {
    this.groceryList.push({ name: "Apples" });
    this.groceryList.push({ name: "Bananas" });
    this.groceryList.push({ name: "Oranges" });
  }
}
```

* **e.** Save your files. When your app refreshes on your device you should see a hardcoded grocery list.

> **TODO**: Add images for iOS and Android

<hr data-action="end" />

#### Background: Why you needed to import `NativeScriptUIListViewModule`

In Angular you must register directives, aka the tag names you use in your markup, before you use them in your templates. NativeScript does this automatically with the NativeScript core UI modules, but does not do this with the NativeScript pro modules, such as the listview you’re using in this example.

#### End Background

Let’s break down what’s happening in the example above. First, your `ListComponent` class now has a `groceryList` property that you fill with three objects in an `ngOnInit` handler. This makes an array of hardcoded data available for your template to bind to.

Let’s break down the template next.

``` XML
<RadListView [items]="groceryList">
  <ng-template let-item="item">
    <Label [text]="item.name"></Label>
  </ng-template>
</RadListView>
```

The [`<RadListView>` pro UI element](http://docs.telerik.com/devtools/nativescript-ui/Controls/Angular/ListView/overview) requires an `items` property that points to an array of data—in this case, the `groceryList` array you added to your `ListComponent` class. The list view element requires a child `<ng-template>` element that specifies how to render each item in the `items` array.

The `let-*` syntax is Angular’s way of creating template variables within loops. You can think of the syntax working like TypeScript’s `let` keyword. This gives you the ability to refer to each item in the array as `item` within the template. For this template, you render each item in the array with a single `<Label>` UI element, and because of the `[text]="item.name"` binding, those labels contain the text from the `name` property of each of the items in `groceryList` TypeScript array.

Now that you have a hardcoded list displaying, let’s see how to swap that out with live data.

<hr data-action="start" />

#### Action

* **a.** Open your `app/shared/grocery/grocery.model.ts` and paste in the following code, which creates a simple `Grocery` model object that you can use throughout your app.

``` TypeScript
export class Grocery {
  constructor(public id: string, public name: string) {}
}
```

* **b.** Next, let’s create a simple service that reads grocery lists from our backend.  Open your `app/shared/grocery/grocery.service.ts` file and paste in the following code.

``` TypeScript
import { Injectable } from "@angular/core";
import { Http, Headers, Response } from "@angular/http";
import { Observable } from "rxjs/Rx";
import "rxjs/add/operator/map";

import { Config } from "../config";
import { Grocery } from "./grocery.model";

@Injectable()
export class GroceryService {
  constructor(private http: Http) {}

  load() {
    let headers = new Headers();
    headers.append("Authorization", "Bearer " + Config.token);

    return this.http.get(Config.apiUrl + "Groceries", {
      headers: headers
    })
    .map(res => res.json())
    .map(data => {
      let groceryList = [];
      data.Result.forEach((grocery) => {
        groceryList.push(new Grocery(grocery.Id, grocery.Name));
      });
      return groceryList;
    })
    .catch(this.handleErrors);
  }

  handleErrors(error: Response) {
    console.log(JSON.stringify(error.json()));
    return Observable.throw(error);
  }
}
```

The code here is very similar to the code you used in the `UserService` earlier in this guide. You use the `Http` service’s `get()` method to load JSON data, and RxJS’s `map()` function to format the data into an array of `Grocery` objects.

* **c.** To use this service, open your `app/pages/list/list.component.ts` file and add the following two lines to the top of the file:

``` TypeScript
import { Grocery } from "../shared/grocery/grocery.model";
import { GroceryService } from "../shared/grocery/grocery.service";
```

* **d.** Next, in the same `list.component.ts` file, change the existing `groceryList` declaration to use the newly imported `Grocery` class instead of a generic `Object`.

``` TypeScript
groceryList: Array<Grocery> = [];
```

* **e.** After that, add the following `constructor` function within the `ListComponent` class.

``` TypeScript
constructor(private groceryListService: GroceryService) {}
```

* **f.** Because the previous line of code injects service into your constructor, you must also include it as a provider within your component decorator. To do so, replace the existing `@Component` decorator with the code below:

``` TypeScript
@Component({
  selector: "gr-list",
  templateUrl: "list/list.component.html",
  styleUrls: ["list/list.component.css"],
  providers: [GroceryService]
})
```

* **g.** Finally, to kick off the call to your new service’s `load()` method, replace the `ListComponent`’s existing `ngOnInit()` method with the code below.

``` TypeScript
ngOnInit() {
  this.groceryListService.load()
    .subscribe(loadedGroceries => {
      loadedGroceries.forEach((groceryObject) => {
        this.groceryList.unshift(groceryObject);
      });
    });
}
```

In case you got lost during this section, your full `list.component.ts` file should now look like this.

``` TypeScript
import { Component, ElementRef, OnInit, ViewChild } from "@angular/core";

import { Grocery } from "../shared/grocery/grocery.model";
import { GroceryService } from "../shared/grocery/grocery.service";

@Component({
  selector: "gr-list",
  templateUrl: "list/list.component.html",
  styleUrls: ["list/list.component.css"],
  providers: [GroceryService]
})
export class ListComponent implements OnInit {
  groceryList: Array<Grocery> = [];

  constructor(private groceryListService: GroceryService) {}

  ngOnInit() {
    this.groceryListService.load()
      .subscribe(loadedGroceries => {
        loadedGroceries.forEach((groceryObject) => {
          this.groceryList.unshift(groceryObject);
        });
      });
  }
}
```

* **g.** Save your files.

<hr data-action="end" />

When your app refreshes on your device you’ll see a blank list page, but you didn’t do anything wrong! Your app now reads grocery data from a backend, but you don’t have any groceries associated with your new account.

To really test out these changes you’ll need to allow users to add groceries to their lists, so let’s look at how to do that next.

### Step 3. Using advanced layouts

### Step 4. Managing the UI during processing

### Step 5. Creating engaging animations
